Project proposal 1
================
Michael
2019-01-13

## Proposal 1(Preferred): “The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility”

### Overview:

##### Summary

This project draws a relationship between where children grow up and
whether or not they “prosper” as adults. Specifically, this project
develops an interactive map which includes every census tract in the
United States as well as the expected adult household earnings for a
child who grew up in a given tract. The project is currently being used
to make judgements about the factors that influence such a finding, and
further, how policy can be used to place children in better
neighborhood, something which I am curious to learn more about.

##### Data Description

The data utilizes information from a vast array of sources and includes
factors such as: household incomes and incarceration rates; race,
gender, and parental income; as well as neighborhood characteristics,
each at the census tract, county, and commuting zone level.

##### Goals

My personal goals for this project are to recreate the interactive map,
including the income predictions, and gain a better understanding of the
factors that went into making such a prediction. It would also be
interesting to explore relationships between the various predictive
factors and the outcomes, as well as map any findings onto the map I
create. Additional goals may arise as I explore the data and gain a
better understanding of the author’s methodology.

### Links:

##### Data Source(s)

  - Excel csv files:
    <https://opportunityinsights.org/data/?geographic_level=0&topic=0&paper_id=1652#resource-listing>

##### Original Work

  - Original Paper:
    <https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/atlas_paper.pdf>

  - Opportunity Insights Webpage:
    <https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/the-opportunity-atlas/>

  - Opportunity Atlas (Map): <https://www.opportunityatlas.org/>

  - NYT Article:
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/01/upshot/maps-neighborhoods-shape-child-poverty.html>

## Proposal 2: “Social Connectedness: Measurement, Determinants, and Effects”

### Overview:

##### Summary

First and foremost, this project looks to map the social connectedness
of every US county to every other US county via a Social Connectedness
Index. The research uses the relative frequency of Facebook friendship
links between county-pairs to create a map of the social connectedness
of the US. Using the connectedness of a given county, the research then
explores the relationship between concentrated social connectedness and
various other factors such as: average income, high school graduation
rates, teen pregnancy, life expectancy, social capital, and social
mobility.

##### Data Description

This data is accumulated from various sources. It includes information
about the relative connectedness of each US county to other US counties
and even foreign countries, as well as, state geographic and demographic
information.

##### Goals

With this project, I would like to replicate the interactive map that
was created and further explore the relationships mentioned above. If
other relationships are available to explore, I would liek to explore
those as well.

### Links:

##### Data Source(s)

This data is accumulated from various sources. The README documentation
provided with the data files from the project itself includes references
on where to find a few files not-included.

  - General Data (at bottom of page):
    <https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.32.3.259>

##### Original Work

  - Original Paper:
    <https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.32.3.259>

  - NYT Article:
    <https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/09/19/upshot/facebook-county-friendships.html>

## Proposal 3: “The 2018 Atlas of Sustainable Development Goals: Education & Poverty”

### Overview:

##### Summary

This project focuses on visualizing and reporting on global progress
towards the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. While not being
particularly interactive, this Atlas aims to be informative and includes
a multitude of visuals explaining progress made on each SDG.

##### Data Description

Data for this project was sourced from the World Bank’s Data API and is
thus accessible. Relevant data is availabe for various countries across
the globe and for a number of different variables.

##### Goals

If I were to do this project, realistically I would only focus on
recreating the visualizations for a few of the SDG’s. In this case, I
would pick one regarding poverty and another regarding Education.

### Links:

##### Data Source(s)

  - Data Portal:
    <https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/atlas-sustainable-development-goals-2018-world-development-indicators>

##### Original Work

  - Atlas: <http://datatopics.worldbank.org/sdgatlas/>
